---
date: 2021-07-08
publishdate: 2021-07-08
featured_image: ""
published_url: "/posts/kestrel-2021-07-08"
description: ""
title: "Practicing Kestrel Hunt on Windows Process Tree From An IP Address"
author: "Xiaokui Shu"
publisher: "Open Cybersecurity Alliance"
featured_image: "/images/kestrel/huntflow.png"
summary: "Process tree is a key to connect and reason cyber attacks within a
host. How to conduct a process tree hunt from an IP address? And how to use
Kestrel analytics?"
tag: "blog"
---

*Let's conduct a
[Kestrel](https://github.com/opencybersecurityalliance/kestrel-lang) process
tree hunting practice to unearth root cause and impacts of activities related
to an IP address on a Windows host. We will take advantage of both pattern
matching and analytics hunting steps and chain them into huntflows.*

### Kestrel Installation And Monitoring System Setup 

We follow the Kestrel installation and Windows monitor setup procedure
described in our blog [Building A Huntbook to Discovery Persistent Threats from
Scheduled Windows Tasks](/posts/kestrel-2021-07-01): we monitor a Windows host
with [Sysmon](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/sysmon),
stream the logs to [Elasticsearch](https://www.elastic.co/) via
[winlogbeat](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/winlogbeat/master/winlogbeat-module-sysmon.html),
[install Kestrel](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html)
in a Python virtual environment, install the *elastic_ecs* connector of
STIX-shifter, and setup
[STIX-shifter](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/source/kestrel_datasource_stixshifter.interface.html)
to access data.

### Entity-based Reasoning From An IP Address

Sysmon traces Windows activities and store individual events as
[records](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#record) in
Elasticsearch. Reasoning on records directly requires excessive knowledge of
record semantics, which gets worse when querying multiple data sources with
different record formats. Kestrel runtime identifies
[entities](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#entity) in
records and automatically collects all available information about entities in
related records before presenting the complete view of entities to the user.
We only need to hunt in terms of entities, e.g., creating a [Kestrel
variable](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#kestrel-variable)
from an IP address,
[finding](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#find) all
processes connected to that IP address. This [entity-based hunting
approach](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#entity-based-reasoning)
makes it easy for human to organize hunts, pivot from one hunt step to another,
and enables [composable huntflow
development](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#composable-hunt-flow).

In this hunting practice, we will start from an IP address `72.21.81.200`, and
walk the process tree connecting to it to reason about the suspiciousness of
the IP.

First, let's create a Kestrel variable with the starting IP address as an entity:

```elixir
ip200 = GET ipv4-addr FROM stixshifter://host101
        WHERE [ipv4-addr:value = '72.21.81.200']
        START t'2021-04-01T00:00:00Z' STOP t'2021-04-06T00:00:00Z'
```

We specify the type of entity `ipv4-addr` we'd like to get from the monitored
Windows host `host101` and describe the matching criteria in STIX pattern
`[ipv4-addr:value = '72.21.81.200']`. We limit the time of search for the first
5 days in April to not boil the ocean of logs. The time range is required in
our first `GET` command in a huntflow. Otherwise, STIX-shifter will default the
time range to the past five minutes.

If you have setup multiple data sources besides `host101`, you can use
auto-complete in Kestrel to list all available data sources by pressing `TAB`
after `stixshifter://`.

![Kestrel first block execution
summary](/images/kestrel/2021-07-08_ip200_summary.png)

After putting the command in a Jupyter cell and execute, we get the execution
summary of the code block---we get one IP address entity and 350 records/logs,
each of which has some information about the IP. We don't bother the number of
records since we are doing entity-based reasoning and Kestrel will assemble the
entity from the 350 records for us.

### Obtaining Associated Network-Traffic And Processes

Before we jump from an IP address entity to one or more process entities, we
need to obtain the pivot entity in between---*network-traffic*. The Kestrel
entity ontology is based on [STIX
SCOs](https://docs.oasis-open.org/cti/stix/v2.1/csprd01/stix-v2.1-csprd01.html#_Toc16070567),
and it is described in the [FIND command
syntax](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#find), which is
the command we use to get connected entities, e.g., `ipv4-addr` entities to
`network-traffic` entities; `network-traffic` entities to `process` entities.

According to the relation chart in the [FIND command
syntax](https://kestrel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/language.html#find), we use
relation `ACCEPTED BY` to indicate the IP in `ip200` is the destination IP of
the `network-traffic` to return. Then we use relation `CREATED` to indicate
the `network-traffic` is associated with the `process` to return. We use `DISP`
command to print select attributes of the entities in a Kestrel variable. Now
let's put all the four commands in a code block to be executed in a Jupyter
Notebook cell:

```elixir
# obtain network traffic that has ip200 as the destination IP
ip200nt = FIND network-traffic ACCEPTED BY ip200
DISP ip200nt ATTR src_ref.value, src_port, dst_ref.value, dst_port

# obtain processes creating the network traffic
p = FIND process CREATED ip200nt
DISP p ATTR pid, name, command_line
```

We get back 350 network traffic in `ip200nt` and 34 processes in `p`. Here's a
partial list of all network traffic in `ip200nt` out of the 350 entities.

![Kestrel network traffic detailed
results](/images/kestrel/2021-07-08_ip200nt_details.png)

We may want to list only the distinguished destination port to get an idea
whether this is just HTTPS (port 443) traffic. We can execute another `DISP`
command in an empty cell. If we are not sure which attributes to list, we can
always do `INFO ip200nt` first.

```elixir
DISP ip200nt ATTR dst_ref.value, dst_port
```

![Kestrel network traffic brief
results](/images/kestrel/2021-07-08_ip200nt_brief.png)

Kestrel automatically deduplicates repeated results so we only see one line of
result, which confirms our guess that all traffic going to the IP is to its
port 443.

Then let's scroll up to check the second output from our previous command `DISP
p` where we show partial results again since the full list of 34 processes are
too long:

![Kestrel first process detailed
results](/images/kestrel/2021-07-08_p_results.png)

All 34 processes in Kestrel variable `p` connects to `72.21.81.200:443` as we
discovered. We can pick up the first process `BackgroundDownload.exe` to start
our process tree walk for further understanding of activities on the Windows
host.

### Process Tree of *BackgroundDownload.exe*

Let's take a close look at a subset of processes with name
`BackgroundDownload.exe` in `p`. From their command line, we can guess they are
benign and belong to Microsoft Visual Studio. Let's check their parent process
to see which process create them.

```elixir
# get a subset of entities from variable `p`
bgdownloads = GET process FROM p WHERE [process:name = 'BackgroundDownload.exe']

# obtain parent processes of bgdownloads
bgdp = FIND process CREATED bgdownloads
DISP bgdp ATTR pid, name, command_line
```

![Kestrel parent process bgdp detailed
results](/images/kestrel/2021-07-08_bgdp_results.png)

We get 4 `BackgroundDownload.exe` processes from `p` and 3 processes as their
parent processes.  From the parent process names and executable paths, we are
more confident `BackgroundDownload.exe` processes are part of Microsoft Visual
Studio and spawned by processes from the suite.

Next let's see if we can trace back one level up to find the grandparent
processes:

```elixir
# grandparent processes of `BackgroundDownload.exe`
bgdpp = FIND process CREATED bgdp
```

![Kestrel parent process bgdpp
summary](/images/kestrel/2021-07-08_bgdpp_summary.png)

Good we see two processes, and Kestrel also gets back some records with network
activities when trying to get the most complete information of the
entities---there are 146 *network traffic* records related to the two
processes. However, this is only a summary of the command execution, and we are
not sure whether the *network traffic* are directly or indirectly linked to the
grandparent processes. Let's print out details of the grandparent processes and
the network traffic:

```elixir
DISP bgdpp ATTR pid, name, command_line

bgdppnt = FIND network-traffic CREATED BY bgdpp
DISP bgdppnt ATTR src_ref.value, src_port, dst_ref.value, dst_port
```
